

Talemi2014 - Arsenic toxicity and detoxification mechanisms in yeast

The model implements arsenite (AsIII) transport regulation, its distribution
within main cellular AsIII pools and detoxification. The intracellular As
pools considered are free AsIII (AsIIIin), protein-bound AsIII (AsIIIprot),
glutathione conjugated AsIII (AsGS3) and vacuolar sequestered AsIII (vAsGS3).  

This model is described in the article:

[Mathematical modelling of arsenic transport, distribution and detoxification
processes in yeast.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/24798644)

Talemi SR, Jacobson T, Garla V, Navarrete C, Wagner A, Tam√°s MJ, Schaber J.

Mol. Microbiol. 2014 Jun; 92(6): 1343-1356

Abstract:

Arsenic has a dual role as causative and curative agent of human disease.
Therefore, there is considerable interest in elucidating arsenic toxicity and
detoxification mechanisms. By an ensemble modelling approach, we identified a
best parsimonious mathematical model which recapitulates and predicts
intracellular arsenic dynamics for different conditions and mutants, thereby
providing novel insights into arsenic toxicity and detoxification mechanisms
in yeast, which could partly be confirmed experimentally by dedicated
experiments. Specifically, our analyses suggest that: (i) arsenic is mainly
protein-bound during short-term (acute) exposure, whereas glutathione-
conjugated arsenic dominates during long-term (chronic) exposure, (ii) arsenic
is not stably retained, but can leave the vacuole via an export mechanism, and
(iii) Fps1 is controlled by Hog1-dependent and Hog1-independent mechanisms
during arsenite stress. Our results challenge glutathione depletion as a key
mechanism for arsenic toxicity and instead suggest that (iv) increased
glutathione biosynthesis protects the proteome against the damaging effects of
arsenic and that (v) widespread protein inactivation contributes to the
toxicity of this metalloid. Our work in yeast may prove useful to elucidate
similar mechanisms in higher eukaryotes and have implications for the use of
arsenic in medical therapy.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000547](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000547).

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024).

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

